[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, it's James here
from Food Matters.
And today I'm here
with Artie Wu.
Artie is an avid meditator.
He's been doing it
for a long time,
and it took him into the
field of emotional healing.
He's the founder
of Preside Life,
which helps people deal with
emotional trauma and helps.
Them transform it into
ultimately finding
their true bliss
and today, we're
going to be talking about
just that and much, much more.
Hello, Artie.
>> Hi, James.
>> I'm excited to chat today,
and particularly interested
in how you came upon sort of
this idea that meditation can
be a powerful tool
for transformation.
How did this start for you?
>> So for me, I grew up in an
environment where meditation,
healing type things
were kind of the norm.
I grew up in New
York, and my mom
had this constant what
I called a carnival
parade of Taoist masters,
Shaolin monks, Tibetan priests
coming through.
And as a child, they
would be doing the rounds
around the world to raise money
for their temples at home.
And they would show up in
our living room with my mom.
And in the course of
peddling their wares--
and I say that with love--
they would say, Mrs. Wu, it's
perfectly safe, these practices
I teach.
Don't listen to my rivals.
They're all scoundrels.
And in fact, you boy, how old
are you, about eight or nine?
Come here.
Even a child could learn it.
Allow me to demonstrate.
I would be exposed
to all this stuff.
So growing up, it
seemed very normal
that people would
meditate, that people would
do these kinds of practices.
It just seemed like
a normal thing,
just like when
you grow up eating
a certain kind of
traditional food
that you don't realize
not everyone eats.
And so it wasn't
till I was in my 20s
when I realized that not only
does not everyone meditate
and have these common
practices, it's
actually the fact that most
people don't do these things.
And it was a shock to me.
It wasn't like, oh my gosh,
the world's messed up.
I was like, oh, the people
who brush their teeth
in this manner are
in the minority.
And I'm like, that
explains a lot.
And so I just tucked that
away, went about my business,
you know, had a
career in high tech.
And after that phase
kind of stopped for me,
I was looking for
the next thing to do.
And the thing that keep kept
coming up for me was this idea
of somehow teaching not
just meditation in general,
but the practices that I've
come to rely on in myself
as a corporate executive,
high-tech founder,
family person in
the modern world--
people with just not a lot
of time and a lot of stress.
And what I realized is there
is a subset of practices
that I just have come to
lean on in my own life.
And those are the ones
that I started teaching.
And it's just been,
for me, this peak
into my bliss,
this emerging peak.
Because at the time,
I was just like--
after I sold my last
company in 2011, I was like,
I'm just going to take another
year off and figure out
what else I might want to do.
And this meditation
thing kept coming up,
to the point where
I finally started
putting some things online.
And then that grew.
And then I got this strand
of feedback from people--
first in the hundreds,
then in the thousands--
were what they would
say is basically,
already these
techniques have helped
me calm the quiet
chatter and voice inside.
So that's great.
And I'm like, great.
You're happy, I'm happy.
Let's just keep rolling.
And to a person they would
say, well, hang on a minute.
I actually have a question.
And my question
is, now that I've
quieted this chattering
voice intermittently
with meditation-- because
it always comes back anyway.
It's a part of you, right?
I realized I actually
have a second problem.
I was like, OK, what's that?
And they would say,
my problem is not
that my inner voice is
chattering and nervous,
because I can quiet
that now when I need to.
My problem is that the tone and
content of what it says to me
is basically abusive.
And it's in my head.
With a couple of
shots of whiskey,
I can kind of hit it
with a two by four.
But it is a part of me, and I am
kind of not reconciled with it,
or it is not
reconciled with me--
however you want
to think about it.
And this, to me,
is the quintessence
of not having inner peace.
You have inner conflict.
It's not like, oh my gosh,
you have inner conflict.
No, no, no.
There are voices and
forces within you,
and they love you and they
do not agree with each other.
So it's like a tug of war
constantly back and forth.
So like any good tech business
person, I ignored the feedback.
I was like, well, just
keep trying, you know?
I don't know what to do.
Until it became this
torrent, this pattern
across thousands of people.
And I was like, I
think this is a thing.
And so I started really
diving into this,
reading anything I
could get my hands on--
the whole range of
scientific all the way
to the really kind
of more alternative.
I would just intake
everything, because I
was chewing on this problem.
And what basically happened
was that I got to this point
where, I think in
hindsight, it had just
stated enough within
me that at one point,
it just came gushing out of
me basically fully formed.
My family and I were on the
island of Hawaii in 2014
in Hilo, literally
visiting the volcano there,
which itself is this symbol
of a well of healing.
I didn't realize that at the
time, but I was on a volcano
while all of this happened.
It just came gushing out of me.
And I was just typing to save
my life, just to get it down
on paper.
And as I was reading
what I was writing,
I was fascinated
but also mortified.
Because I was like,
this is not meditation.
I don't know what this.
Is this emotional healing?
Is this talking about inner
wounds, why your voice is
negative, what to do about it?
And I basically just
barfed it all out,
and then closed it and
put it in my desk drawer
and left it alone
for six months.
I was like, I can't do that.
I mean, as a former tech person,
being a meditation teacher
is pretty much already the
last word in poor taste, right?
So I was like, I can't take
this next step forward.
I just-- you know, I have
this muse that I refer to.
And I was just like, I'm sorry.
I can't.
This is too much.
So I left it in the
drawer for six months.
And in December of
2014, I got an email
from one of my
student's advisees
who was taking one of
my meditation courses.
And in these courses,
you can email me
and I'll kind of give you
pointers and adjustments.
And so this woman emailed.
I was giving her
help with meditation.
And as these things
go, she started
getting into her background and
her life story and everything.
I'll spare you all the detail,
but basically, the thumbnail
of her life story is
that from age four to 18
had been sexually
abused and assaulted
by basically every adult male in
her family and extended family.
Lifelong alcoholic, drug user.
Had recently graduated to meth.
Single mom, six-year-old son.
And just this very
much salt of the earth,
good-hearted, good, just
solid person at the core
but with an internal voice that
basically would rip into her
like 150 times a day.
And she said, you know,
I've been to AA three times.
I've been to rehab three times.
This warehouse that I work
in, I have great benefits
and everything so I
can go to therapy.
I'm just trying to
stay alive for my son.
And so nothing else worked, and
I came across your meditation.
And I'm trying it, and it's
sort of started to work.
And at that point I
was just like, OK.
OK.
Just give me a week.
And she's like, no, no, no.
I'm fine doing-- I
was like, meditation
is not what you need.
Just give me a week.
I'll come up with something.
And she's like, well, I'm
not asking for a handout.
I was like, just give me a week.
And she was like, OK.
So at the end of 2014 and
the week between Christmas
and New Year's, I holed up
in my studio with my mic
and I basically recorded
this Eleven talk series.
And I don't name her,
but I'm basically
talking to her the whole time.
In that, I basically outline
the full arc of everything
I barfed out in
Hilo on the volcano.
And to me, that was
basically the muse, if you
want to call her that, coming in
and saying, well, that's fine.
I've given you this.
I've sent you all these signals.
I've pulled all the
stuff out of you,
and you're still
being chickenshit.
And that's fine.
I mean, you're just
human, and a man.
It's all fine.
But I just want to make
it clear that if you
turn your back on me, you're
turning your back on her too.
Fuck with me.
And I was like, fine.
Fine.
So I recorded the Eleven talks.
I sent them to her.
Long story short, she did well.
She did well.
She stopped drinking.
She stopped using, the
whole roller coaster.
And to me, every now and then--
I mean, we're friends.
Every now and then, she'll
still email me saying, well,
I fell off the wagon.
I had half a shot,
and I spit it out.
It just tasted disgusting.
But I'm such a bad person.
And I'm just like, every
time I get an email from you,
I do a happy dance around
my office because I'm like,
you're unkillable.
I'm just so happy every day
I know you're still alive
and you're with your
son and all of that.
And so that's how I got
pulled kicking and screaming
into healing.
And after I shot
that, I just gave
it to all my meditation people.
And they were like, this is
like the best meditation.
And I'm like, it's
not a meditation.
It's-- never mind.
Fine.
And so the way I
characterize what
I do is that the main arrow that
I care about that my bliss is
is to help people to the
extent that they want--
and many people don't
want this, and that's OK--
to help people get
to a point where
they are able to basically
ask the question of,
what is my bliss?
What is my meaning
and purpose in life?
And then arrange
things in their life
to be able to actually pursue
it and fulfill it, if they want.
There is no should.
If you don't want to do this,
you're not a bad person.
You're not wasting your life.
I don't believe in any
of that finger-wagging.
But for the people
who want to do
that, my job is to be
this kind of Mercury,
kind of Hermes kind
of guide advisor
to help them along that path.
And what I've
discovered along the way
is that when you hear
about bliss, it's like, oh,
it's so wonderful, and rainbows
and unicorns on the one hand.
And on the other hand, you have
a whole school folks wagging
the finger, well, if
you don't do this,
you're wasting your life.
And I don't subscribe
to either of those.
My view of bliss is
that to really get
on the path of following your
bliss, it is a messy business.
It is a messy business.
Because when we're
brought into this world
as it is and we're trained to
conform and put on a mask--
women are typically told
to put on the mask that
basically says "The Good
Girl" across the top, right?
And we could talk for
hours about all that.
And guys are basically
given this mask
saying "The Strong Boy"
or "The Strong Man."
Note that it's the "strong
man," not necessarily
the good man, right?
And if you realize
underneath the mask,
your bliss takes you
in a direction which
requires you to
take that mask off,
you're in for a lot of trouble.
And the older you
are, the more time
you have allowed to
elapse for your world
to accrete around you, presuming
that mask is the real you.
When you start to take
that off, your entire world
starts to wobble.
And so for me, when
I sort of offer
resources and tools for people
to do self-reflection and maybe
try to self-heal some
things to the extent
that they're comfortable,
the goal in my mind
is always to see if you feel
ready and desirous of actually
following your bliss.
To me, the purpose of healing
is not the cessation of pain.
The purpose of healing is
to recover your own fulsome
wholeness.
And it's with that wholeness
that you're able to actually
figure out, who
am I actually now
that I've accounted
for everyone within me?
And what do we
actually want to do?
And what are the pitfalls
and risks and threats
if we go down that path, and
do we actually want to do that?
The answer may be
no, and that's OK.
So that to me,
healing is a means
to the end of getting you to
the point where you can actually
even make consciously
the choice of go or no go
on the full flowering
of why you're here.
Healing is not just
the cessation of pain.
A pill will do that, right?
A couple of martinis
will do that temporarily.
And so when people
come to me with things
that they feel meditation
will help with,
finding their bliss
recovering exiled parts of
themselves will help with,
that's great.
I'm a nerd, and I love
discussing all of that stuff.
But at the end of the
day, it is with this half
an eye to get you to willingly,
or in some cases accidentally,
stumble across this glimmer
of a vision of like, oh, I
think I'm actually here to do
something along this direction.
And once you have that
glimmer, it's hard to forget.
That's what makes me
happy and excited.
>> That's cool.
Thank you for that.
It helps describe, I guess, the
mission and the guiding force
behind what you do,
which you've discovered,
which is to help really
people align with their place.
And this sort of meditation
to emotional trauma component
is just a stepping
stone, in a way.
So let's speak to
that a little bit.
How typically do people
develop emotional wounds,
as you call them?
And what sort of environments
might that happen in?
Like, is it the environment
of the narcissistic father
or the split
personality this or the
bipolar this or in the language
that gets spoken to them?
How do people develop these type
wounds, in your understanding?
>> You know, it's interesting.
I'll give you kind of
this headline first,
and then I want to
dive in a little bit.
But the headline
for me is that I've
worked with tens of thousands
of people at this point.
And I don't consider myself
a professional or expert.
I've just seen a
lot of patterns.
And in my non-expert,
non-professional kind
of feeling of the
things I've seen,
my sense is that
everyone has a wound.
And that's OK, and
that's actually normal.
It's not a-- it's hard
to find the right words,
but it's not a tragedy
of epic proportions
that everyone in humanity
ends up having a wound.
It is tragic in the sense of
the severity of some people's
wounds, right?
You can't help but have
empathy for that and compassion
and feel that pain with them.
But it's almost, to me at
this point with everything
I've seen, a kind of universal
anatomical feature, if you
will.
And this is, in its own
way, a beautiful thing,
because the wound is what
sets you up for bliss.
I think Joseph Campbell
used to quote someone else--
and I don't remember.
I don't think I even know.
But the thing he used
to say over and over
is that your deepest wound is
the source of your greatest
gift to the world.
And so it's your wound that
basically throws the penny
into the deep end
of the pool for you
then to dive down in terms
of fulfilling and finding
your bliss.
I don't know how it turned
out to be like that,
but that's the pattern
I see in everyone.
And so to your question of
how do these wounds develop
in general, I don't
think of it as like, oh,
there's this part
of the population.
We know what's
going on with them,
but everyone else is all right.
For me, it's universal.
And for me, the basic thumbnail
of how I have seen it happen
and I have heard it kind
of relayed thousands
upon thousands of
times is this idea of,
you're born into the
world as a child.
As a child, you have no control
over your outer environment.
You don't get to
pick your parents.
You certainly don't get to
pick your siblings or any
of that stuff, right?
So you're born into
this environment.
And pretty quickly, the
giants in your world--
the adults-- look at you and
say, all right, little boy.
Now we want you to put
this thing on, or else.
And they hand you this mask.
And the mask for boys
will say, you know,
the strong silent type.
For women, it will be
the good girl typically,
some form of the good girl.
And you learn pretty
quickly that this mask comes
with a set of expectations
around your behavior,
around things you'll
say, around things you're
allowed to think and not think.
And the consequences for when
you take it off and speak your
mind as a child, especially
in the wrong environment--
touching things that you're
not supposed to touch,
saying things, being
curious about things
that you're not supposed
to be curious about.
What you realize as a
young person is that when
you start to take that
mask off, justice is swift.
The mask then comes with
its own penal code of like,
if you take it off, here are
the escalating levels of voltage
that will be applied
to you to get you
to put the damn thing back on.
Now, for me there's nothing
wrong with this mask.
I mean, we all need masks to
put on to get on with the world.
Society has to work.
It's just a natural part of
getting on as a social species.
But the issue that
often happens is
that because you're being
asked to put this mask on--
if you're my child, I may
enforce it pretty strictly, but
because I want to protect you.
I don't want you to get
beaten up in the schoolyard
after school.
I don't want you
to be ostracized.
I want you to have prestige
and money and all the things
you want in this world.
And that requires the
participation and cooperation
and even adulation
of people around you,
and you need to put a certain
kind of mask on for that.
But where the wound comes
in then is where as a kid
you're like, holy crap.
Every time I take this thing
off, I get cattle prodded hard.
So it must mean that they
want me to put this on.
And as a child, if nobody pulls
you aside to explain all this--
kids are not stupid.
They can connect the
dots and do the math.
And for most kids
who are thinking
about it, which is pretty much
all kids, they will conclude--
and not unreasonably so--
that if I take this mask
off, I will lose love.
I will not be worthy of love.
I will not be a good person.
And the message for many people
is, you won't deserve love--
which means, don't expect
love from anyone around you.
But also, if you intrinsically
don't deserve love,
you shouldn't even
love yourself.
You within you shouldn't
even love yourself.
And that's poisonous.
Now, unbeknownst to the
little six-year-old,
the parents around
them could be perfectly
willing to die for them, take
a bullet for them or whatever.
But you don't know that as a
kid, because you've never held
your own little newborn in
your arms where you're like,
oh my gosh, I would die for
this little peanut, right?
So for you as a kid
you're like, well,
it feels like I'm losing love.
When I don't get
to have dessert,
when I get sent to my room,
when I get physically punished,
it feels like I'm not loved.
Of course it feels like that.
So in the absence of an elder
pulling them aside to say,
look, you are loved
without condition.
You are loved without
condition, period.
Any of us here would
die for you, period.
And if we wouldn't,
or if you think
we wouldn't, or if we actually
wouldn't, that's on us.
That's not on you.
That's a wound that we have.
It's a defect that we carry.
It has nothing to do with
your intrinsic loveability.
Your love without
condition, period.
Now, with that aside--
love's not on the table--
let's talk about how
we keep your mask on.
Because I want you to have
all the things you want.
Let's talk about how to--
and at that point,
you're their advisor,
helping them, in their pit crew
while they're driving the race
car, helping them win the
race that they choose to run.
But for most people, they
don't pull their kids aside
to explain that, because it
was never explained to them.
They're still running
for their lives thinking,
I need to make my
revenue this quarter
or I will not deserve love,
even from my own self.
And that's a great motivator.
It's great for earnings.
It's great for
your bank account.
It's great for a lot of things.
And it's not that I am
against any economic growth
and thriving or whatever.
But it's just a
question of the cost.
To have that sort of
fear hanging over you
and have that be the reason you
are so productive in your life,
that to me is too high a cost.
And it's not even an issue
of the practical cost.
It's the fact that it
isn't actually true.
No matter how bad your dad was,
how harsh he was, at the end
of the day he would
give his life for you.
And every now and then I'll
come across someone who says,
no, that's not true.
That's just not true.
Actually, there was
an actual incident
where my dad said,
take him and not me.
I've heard everything.
And even in that
case I'm like, well,
it still doesn't impinge on
your inherent loveability.
Because if a parent doesn't look
after their kid in that way,
the parent is wounded.
And I've never heard anyone say
their parent didn't love them
and then when I ask them, well,
do you think they were wounded,
100% of the time they're like,
oh, yeah, let me tell you.
No normal healthy person
isn't willing at a snap
to give their life
for their child.
Whales will do that.
Mother bears will do that.
You don't even have
to be a mammal.
Chickens will do that.
And so humans are no different.
We're wired for protection
of our offspring.
And to the extent that
that fails in practice,
it's simply because of a wound.
But very rare is the
child where someone pulls
them aside to kind of chalk
talk all this through, to say,
OK, there's nothing
wrong with you.
You're actually awesome.
And despite all this,
there's a little bit
of navigating we
need to get you out
of the minefield to go on and
find and follow your bliss.
Because when you do
that, the importance--
I mean, as a tech
person, the scalability
of helping people find
and follow their bliss
is powerful, because when a
person is following their bliss
there's kind of two
orders of benefit.
The first order is, when you
find and follow your bliss,
it is the things you love
to do for no good reason,
that you would pay to do if you
had to and you had the means--
which also, as a byproduct,
as a sort of happy accident,
creates value for other people.
So there's all these things
you love to do, some of which
create value for people.
And then at the
bottom is what I call
a bliss target, or
an empathy target,
which is a
constituency of people
that you have just
disproportionate empathy for.
You will drop everything to
help this stranger, friend
of a friend of a friend,
build their backyard
deck for barbecuing, if that
happens to be your bliss.
You have those three
things together
and you've got a
complete bliss circuit.
And so when you find
and follow your bliss,
the first order of benefit
is your empathy target.
I mean, they are benefiting
all the live long day
from you just doing the
thing you love selfishly.
But then the
second-order benefit
is that you become a signpost
to other people around you.
When you're finding and
following your bliss, you are--
I mean, we talk about
soothing and shielding.
Following your bliss is
the ultimate soothing,
because it feels good
minute to minute.
And it's also the
ultimate shielding,
because you have this
goofy smile on your face
the whole time, and
you really don't
care what other people think.
I mean, someone taps
you on the shoulder
and asks you who your mother
is, and you don't know,
because you're so in the
flow of what you're doing.
And people can smell
that a mile away.
You can feel it when you're
sitting in the room with them.
And so that is to me
an even more powerful--
because it's more generalized.
When you're following
your bliss, your own sort
of nerdy empathy
target benefits,
you become a
signpost for everyone
around you, because
people look at you when
you're following your bliss.
And hopefully, the reaction is,
first of all, they're inspired.
Like, oh my gosh,
she's so amazing.
But then hopefully, their next
reaction is like, and I mean,
what's so special about him?
If he could do it,
I must have a shot.
I must have shot.
In an ideal world, we
reach a tipping point
where enough people
are doing it where
there's a critical
mass, where it becomes
more of this normal thing.
And there is this constant
tug of war between the two
forces of bliss--
doing the thing you do out
of love, not fear, and fear,
doing the thing you do
out of just abject fear,
fear of being
poor, being shamed.
But basically, it all boils
down to fear of loss of love,
fear of, again, that mask.
You keep the mask
on out of fear.
And that's where
the problem comes,
because you're keeping it
on, in my opinion, based
on a false pretense, which is
that your love is conditional.
And that's just false.
>> You're really decoupling
a lot of the activity
of the world.
Like you said, it's productive
for people to be fearful,
in a way.
>> Absolutely.
>> If they're out
there being successful
because they're trying to make
up for a lack of self-love
in their own household
when they were growing up,
that's great for shareholders.
You know what I mean?
>> In the short-term.
And it's horrible for
that guy's midlife crisis,
because he's going
to hit this wall
and go, oh my god,
I'm not loved.
What's going on?
Or just break down.
Or just tough it out long
enough until he dies, right?
Or until the brain
start shutting down--
which is dementia, there's
even some studies now showing
it's just because their body
is just like, I can't handle--
I can't reconcile this anymore,
this heart-head situation,
so I'm just going to atrophy.
Too deep.
Let's pull it back a second.
Four types of emotional trauma
that you sort of identified,
because I like how you
bring an analysis to this.
You're like, we can chunk
emotional trauma down
into these four things.
I'd like to speak to that.
How do you sort of categorize
these emotional traumas?
Because I think people will
connect with one of those four.
>> Yeah.
So I think in terms of just a
self-negative inner voice and I
think less in terms
of trauma per se,
because to me that's more of a--
it may be that.
But that's more of
kind of a medical term.
People mean different
things when they say that.
So for me, there's
this voice that's
just giving you a hard
time, like, all the time.
So it's more of a commonsensical
kind of level of it.
And for me when I
talk about this,
when the voice comes at you and
starts doing this blistering,
multipronged attack, it's
like the splits in chess,
where it's like the
bishop is hitting you
and the queen's coming around
behind you, and just everything
all at once from all directions.
If you break it down, the
self-negative inner critic
force will typically come
at you across four channels.
And the four are
competence, body, identity,
and relationship is
how I think about them.
Competence is the idea that you
should be better at something
than you actually are.
So it could be your
grades, how much money
you make, prestige, popularity,
sociability, cooking, skill
as a lover--
any of these things.
But generally, it's something
that has to do with competence.
You have some power over it.
It is a skill.
It is something you can
work on, theoretically.
So that's the first one.
The second one is body, which
is this feeling that there's
something intrinsically wrong
with your body-- that you're
either too fat or too thin,
too tall or too short,
the wrong body shape, the wrong
body color, a feature is too
big, your nose or your ears.
It could be you're too
hairy or not hairy enough.
So any of these things.
But basically, this
idea that there's just
something wrong with
my body that, again,
makes me not worthy of love.
The third is identity,
which is the idea there's
something intrinsically wrong
with basically something
about you as a person that
you're basically not going
to change.
So it could be your gender.
It could be your ethnicity.
It could be your
religious affiliation.
It could even be
your personality,
where it's like,
I'm intrinsically
kind of an introvert.
But I'm a sales guy
or an executive,
so I'm expected to play golf
and do all these things.
So I do them
begrudgingly, but I feel
like there's something
wrong with me
because I actually
like sitting at home
and just reading a book.
The fourth is a little
bit in its own category,
and that's what I
call relationship.
And that's the
idea that you have
this core belief in your
mind that I will only
be worthy of love if blank.
I will only be lovable and
worthy of love if blank.
And this blank
conflates beautifully
with the first three.
I will only be lovable if I'm
competent-- if I make money,
if I'm rich, if I'm smart,
if I get good grades, if I
score a lot of goals on the
athletic field, if I'm popular.
Or body-- I'll only be
lovable if I'm tall,
if I'm hot, if I'm skinny, if
I've got a full head of hair--
all these things, right?
Identity-- I'll only be lovable
if I'm not the gender I am,
because boys are more
valuable than girls.
Siblings talk about
this all the time.
If I'm a different
ethnicity, if I'm
a different religion, if I'm
a different personality type.
And so the poison
of this last one--
I will only be
lovable if black--
is not from what you
put in the blank.
That's irrelevant.
So for instance,
even if I said, I
will only be lovable if I
find the cure for cancer,
solve global warming, and save
7 billion people on the planet--
even if that's what's in the
blank-- because it's like,
who wouldn't want that?
Please.
Please do that.
Whip you.
Whip you harder.
Even that's poison,
because the poison is not
what you put in the blank.
The poison is in the "if."
The "if" is what implies that
before you've done anything--
competence, identity,
anything-- that you as you
are, before we've
turned over any cards
to figure out what you're
actually going to do
or even what you
want to do, that you
as you are with no additional
bells and whistles, you
as you are are intrinsically
unworthy of love.
And that's bullshit.
That's not true.
The trick is when,
as a parent yourself,
you know this is
true when you hold
your baby on the day he is born
and you realize, oh my gosh.
I would give my life for
this slimy little peanut
that just pooped on me.
I would do anything
for this little peanut.
And there is no conditionality.
You don't know anything
about this little guy.
And no father or
parent, hopefully,
says, well, I don't
know if I like this guy.
Let's see if he gets into
Harvard, and then we'll see.
Nobody says that, hopefully.
But if they do,
you know one thing.
There's nothing wrong
with the kid, right?
There's a deep
wound in the parent.
And so the only reason that
changes as the kid grows up
is because we have to get
them to put on a mask.
And then the colossal
misunderstanding
of, no, no, no, no, no, your
love is not conditional.
You've got to put on--
we all wear a mask.
Look at stupid Uncle Bob.
He wears his mask too.
Not very well, but.
You know, all these things.
But love is not on
the table, right?
You don't earn your love.
There's nothing additional you
need to do to earn your love.
And so what then
happens is that we all--
so typically when
I give this talk,
after I describe the four--
competence, body, identity,
and relationship--
I see in the audience the blood
draining from everyone's faces,
because they're thinking,
oh my gosh, I'm screwed.
I have all four.
And at that point I always
remember to say, OK, hang on.
Everyone has all four.
Everyone has all four, so
there's nothing wrong with you.
And the trick is that
the four elements
are blended into a unique
smoothie for each person.
So we all have all
four, but the mix
of competence, body, identity,
and relationship is different,
and the flavor of
each one is different.
So your competence wound--
so first of all, as
men, typically it's
like 80% competence and
everything else is fine.
But your flavor of competence
may be artistic achievement.
Or somebody else's
flavor competence
may be just brute force money.
That's just the topography
of different people's sort
of makeup.
But what will happen is
that each person will
have the same four components,
but the proportions
will be different, and the
flavors will be different.
So when I sip my smoothie
and I look at everyone else's
smoothie, I feel like
I'm the only dumb bunny
idiot in the room with this
particular inner voice.
I'm the only one, which
makes me feel even more
stupid, because nobody--
I mean, look at Instagram.
Everyone's having a
great time, right?
I'm the only dumb bunny
who didn't get the memo,
and I'm the only one
who says this to myself.
And the thing is, in
a manner of speaking
that's true, because each
person's fingerprint is unique.
But what that
doesn't account for
is the fact that actually,
everyone has a fingerprint.
Everyone does have a smoothie.
My smoothie doesn't look
like yours, so I don't stress
and obsess about
the things you do.
I stress about other
stuff that I then
hide, because I have to
put it behind my mask.
And so one of the
things I didn't realize
what happened that's been a
wonderful sort of byproduct
is that even when people just
hear about the four wounds,
they breathe this
huge sigh of relief.
Because it's like
saying, yes, yes, yes,
your elbow does hurt
in its own unique way.
But everyone has an elbow.
There's nothing wrong with you.
We'll just get it looked at.
We'll attend to
it, and it's fine.
And people sort of breathe
this sigh of relief where they
realize, even though
my thing feels unique--
and at a certain level it is--
the phenomenon is
common to everyone.
So that instead of feeling
alienated and angry
and potentially acting out from
that, with this perspective
you're like, first of
all, there's a reason
you feel like that.
And the reason is actually
related to the fact
that we all have that.
So we bring you back in
with this perspective
that makes you feel truthfully
that what you're feeling,
however painful it
is, is what you share
with the collective sort of mass
of everyone else in humanity,
where you get back to this
feeling of like, yeah,
yeah, that's cool.
I mean, it's awful.
It's painful.
But it's like, it's
totally normal.
It's OK.
Everyone's got it.
It won't seem like it.
It will seem like you're alone.
And that's normal too.
So tell me more about
what's going on.
Let's just get it looked at.
>> It is interesting to
come to that realization.
And I think for a lot of people,
starting to identify that they
may have, let's say, this
idea of an emotional wound--
or really, what it is that
you speak to is a lack
of self-worth at some level,
like a negative self-voice
or a lack of self-worth, or I'll
only be loved when, et cetera--
which I think a lot of
people can relate to.
However, they might only
realize after something happens,
like a trauma or a mid-life or
something that wakes them up--
or they have something
transformative happen,
like a child comes in.
They're like, why
am I doing this?
Why am I doing this?
What's going on?
And when you identify and talk
to these ideas of shielding
and soothing, I think
that's where people
can start to put themselves
into the picture of like,
no, I'm fine.
I'm fine.
And then you explain
the shielding technique.
You're like, well, why am I
trying to be so successful?
Oh, to get my father's love,
because he's an accountant
and it's only if you've got a
big bank balance that you're
truly loved.
And so you start
to become aware,
I think, through these concepts
of shielding and soothing
that you talk to, because
it's like, well, I
drink a lot when I've
got emotional issues
with my significant other.
Well, maybe I've got
relationship issues to myself
or my parents did that.
So these ideas of
shielding and soothing,
can you explain them out a
little bit in that it might
help people connect with what
their core wound might be,
or the specific flavor
of their smoothie?
>> Absolutely.
So when you have one
of these smoothies,
you're sipping it all day long
whether you like to or not.
I mean, the voice is in you.
You see somebody
drive a nice car by
and you're like, oh my
gosh, I feel like an idiot.
Or you're a mom taking
your kids to school,
and this other mom brings her
kids and her daughter's hair,
the hair for her daughters are
all brushed and perfectly fine.
And you feel like
your daughter's hair
is like a rat's nest,
and the inner voice just
starts to eat you alive.
And so when you have
this smoothie, it hurts.
When you say these things
to yourself constantly
with the upshot,
the sort of so-what,
being, and you're
not worthy of love.
You're less lovable.
It hurts.
And because it
hurts, it's a wound.
And so for me, when
you have a wound,
there's two very
natural things you do.
If I'm a, you know, like
Roman gladiator in the arena,
and we're fighting and
you cut my chest a little,
I'm going to do two things.
The first thing I'm going to
do is I'm going to shield.
Don't hit me again.
It's perfectly reasonable.
If you didn't do
that, I would worry.
So I expect you to shield.
And the other thing is that
behind the safety of my shield,
I will try to grab lidocaine
or something, some spray
or whatever, to make the
pain less so I will soothe.
And that's perfectly
reasonable too.
It's not just
humans that do this.
Earthworms do this.
Chickens do it.
If I poke an earthworm, it will
start to move away from me.
So there's nothing
wrong with a person
when they soothe or
shield, just like there's
nothing wrong with a person
when they have this four
wound, because they were
told to put on a mask.
And there's nothing
wrong with that.
There's nothing wrong
with any of this.
It's just when it
happens in a certain way,
it causes more pain
than it requires.
So if you saw a person
soothe and shield,
my reaction is like
perfectly normal.
Nothing wrong with I'm
not doing anything wrong.
If you zoom in on
shielding, there
are a couple of usual suspects.
The first is money and prestige.
You can't argue with
success, especially here
in the Silicon Valley, right?
If I IPO'ed my company
for half a billion dollars
and now I've got a checkbook
funding all these nonprofits,
no one is going
to poke my wound.
It's this auto drone
century mode shield,
and no one is going to
poke my wound, as long
as I know everyone in
the room knows who I am
and what I've done-- which
is why people with prestige
and money will often
make sure you know that,
because they're just making
sure that the shield is up.
OK.
And by the way, there's
nothing wrong with this.
So money and prestige is one.
Perfectionism is another, where
if I'm perfect in every way--
perfect body, perfect spouse,
perfect house, perfect kids,
put together in
exactly the right way,
doing all the right activities,
the right kind of job,
the right kind of volunteer,
kids doing the right thing
everything--
then that is hopefully
an impenetrable shield
where no arrow criticism
can get through.
And the issue, of course,
with perfectionism
is that it's exhausting,
and it's impossible.
Third on the list is anger.
So if I'm angry all
the time and I've
got a scowl and people
know to walk on eggshells,
that keeps everyone
at a distance.
And that's functionally
what I want,
because if you do come
in to swing at me,
I'm already out of range.
So that's also very effective.
But again, the cost is that
estranges my relationships
and I have no warmth in my life.
The last two are invisibility
and people-pleasing.
So invisibility as a shield is,
if I keep my head down, dress
very plainly, don't raise
my hand, speak up in class,
don't speak up in
business meetings,
maybe the bullies will not
notice me and not pull me out
to shame me or ridicule
me in some way.
And the shield of
people-pleasing is that
if everyone around me is happy--
and more importantly,
happy with me--
then perhaps the bullies
will give me a pass today.
And the problem
with these last two
is that they're
not actual shields.
They don't actually
block anything.
Invisibility, you're
not blocking anything.
And unfortunately,
you're not an iguana.
So I can see you.
But you're trying to
sort of evade attention.
And the problem
with people-pleasing
is that it's not
a shield either.
It doesn't block.
It's appeasement.
So in the classroom,
it's the class clown.
And in real life,
it's the parent
that is like serving everybody
in the upper generation,
the in-laws, everyone
in the lower generation,
serving spouse,
serving the workplace,
and there's like
nothing left for me.
And you do this because you
feel like you have to do this,
or else you will lose love
and not be worthy of love.
So you'll give
anything for that.
But again, for me
that's a false premise.
And when you realize that,
everything around you
starts to realign,
because you're like,
I'm not going to lose love.
So if I know that, how does
that change my behavior?
But of course, the issue is when
you start taking off the mask,
all of reality starts to
move with it, your then
current reality.
So that's shielding.
It's just a menu of options.
Everyone comes up
with their own mix.
They use different
things in different--
and there's nothing
wrong with them.
If you have a wound--
and we all do--
you will shield.
So what I teach is not
an exercise in like,
how do we get you
to shield less?
It's like, no, no, no.
Keep that thing up.
I don't want you to get hit.
But it's more a question
of just making sure you're
getting value for money, right?
I'm laying out all
this blood and treasure
to keep the shield up.
I want it to work.
Because you paid all this effort
and blood, sweat, and tears
for the shield, it better work.
And if it's not, switch
it up and come up
with a different one.
And soothing is similar.
The usual suspects are
alcohol and substances,
just the chemical brute force
of hitting the voice to shut it
up, making this painless.
It's sex and relationships.
So sex as like the physical act,
just the narcotic act of sex.
But also relationships,
which is like the surge
of emotional validation you
get the first two or three
weeks in any relationship.
Then after that, you kind of
see each other more clearly
and you say, ah,
and you run away.
So jumping from
thing to thing just
to get that, just to kind
of skim the top frosting
on the cupcake off and
then kind of move on
is a form of soothing.
And it's very common.
People do it all the time.
And I know it causes
pain, and people
don't want to get trapped
in these repetitive cycles.
And I get that.
But at the same time
I'm like, you're
not doing it because
you're an idiot.
There's a reason
you're doing it.
It's a very reasonable
reason why you're doing it.
And once you know
that, then it's
like, OK, well, how do I want
to rearrange things so that I'm
paying less for my pain relief?
And then others, the soothing--
just sort of texting, gaming,
shopping, gossiping, Netflix--
in a good way.
But the thing is, for
me then, the question--
exactly the same as shielding--
is not, how do we get
you to not soothe.
Even an earthworm is going
to soothe when you poke it.
So it's not unreasonable
for you to soothe.
Again, for me it's just a
question of value for money,
or value for your outlay--
which is, am I getting
the pain relief
I need at the lowest
possible cost?
So when I give talks at
schools and high schools
and I start talking
about soothing,
everyone starts to
roll their eyes.
It's like, ah, this was really
interesting until he turned out
to be the guy that's just going
to say don't do drugs, right?
And I say, no, no,
that's not my message.
I mean, yeah, please
don't do drugs.
Don't do any of that stuff.
But that's the other guy.
That's not me.
OK?
What I'm here to say
is, you will soothe.
You will soothe.
And the only question
is, how do you
want to soothe to
get the maximal pain
relief for the least cost?
And I start going through
the list and I'm like--
so one thing, if
you were coming up
with a Silicon Valley
high-tech feature
list for this new
product, the first feature
is that it would be nice
if your method of shooting
didn't kill you.
That would be nice.
That would be cool.
The second feature would
be, it would be nice
if your method of soothing
didn't hurt yourself
or for other people.
That would be great.
And so we go through the
list, and everyone just
comes up with how
they currently soothe
and then how they
would rearrange things
to soothe with better value.
And one of the liberating things
about realizing shielding,
but in particular soothing,
is that when you realize this
entire range of things--
everything from sex, drugs,
heroin, binge-drinking, all
the way down to like Netflix
and stupid games on your phone--
once you realize this full
rogue's gallery of shootings
are all aimed at numbing
a single wound within you,
one of the things that
many people realize
is that, holy cow,
if they're all
aiming at the same
thing, then that
means they're interchangeable.
Any soothing will do.
So I often have people
coming in after like day two
or day three of the
seven-day healing program,
and they say, well,
you know, I feel bad.
I'm still soothing.
I'm like, it's OK to soothe.
Well, yeah, I stopped drinking.
I'm not doing weed anymore.
I'm taking a three-month break
from any more relationships.
But man, I'm watching
a lot on Netflix.
I'm like watching "Game of
Thrones" like the third time.
And I'm like, how
is that not a win?
How is that not a win?
You're going to soothe.
So this whole beating yourself
up-- oh, I'm still soothing.
I'm a bad person.
It's like, no, no, no.
You're going to soothe.
But you're soothing in
a way which is harmless.
And then the puritanical--
well, it's not productive time,
and it takes a lot of time.
Do you know how long
"Game of Thrones" is?
And I'm like, well,
if you're laid out
from a binge of
whatever and you're not
functional for three
days, you basically
spent the same amount of time.
I can argue this all day long.
But the bottom line is, you
have seen how you soothe.
You realize they're all
doing the same thing.
And you're just shimmying
the dividing line
of allocation of soothing
method toward things
that just cost you less in terms
of pain, money, time, blood,
and treasure.
That's great.
I mean, that is an act of
self-love and self-care.
So I'm like, don't beat
yourself up for it.
>> Do you find that just
the awareness that soothing
and shielding comes from the
belief that there is a lack
of love to go around and
that you want to be loved,
just that alone is
healing unto itself?
They're like, oh wow,
that's a realization.
Well, I just don't need to
do that as much anymore.
>> Yeah.
I mean, there's all kinds of
different profiles of folks
out there, right?
But there's definitely
those who will
hear everything
I've just described
and they'll be like, thank you.
I'm done.
And they just go in, and they
start rearranging things.
I mean, they quit their job.
They realize they're
suffering all this indignity
and deterioration of their
health for this shield.
And they're like, I can get this
same thickness and durability
of shield across the street
for a tenth of the price.
I'm done.
I'm gone.
And they just walk
away with no problem.
So there are these
beautiful kind
of realizations of, I guess what
a Wall Street guy would call
arbitrage opportunities, where
it's like, you're getting
the same thing,
completely same value
for like a tenth of the cost.
And it's like, done.
Do that deal all day long.
So that's very
gratifying, because that's
the simplest part of it.
But I think the
satisfaction for me,
it's not just in giving you
an interesting new framework
to see things in
a different way.
The deeper thing
that I'm finding I'm
always needing to reinforce--
because I'm pushing against the
mass of a fear-driven culture.
It is what it is.
You just play the ball
as it lies, right?
This is where we are.
It's this idea that
doing these things is not
intrinsically bad.
There's no shame in it.
There's nothing wrong with you.
Something I'll often-- they'll
tell me this whole thing
and how they're a
terrible person.
And I'm just like,
well, hang on a minute.
And they're like, well,
you're this healing expert,
and you've got it
all figured out.
So first of all, that's
definitely not true.
But secondly, I'm not flying
the same fighter jet you are.
If I were in the same
fighter jet you're flying,
born into the
family you were born
in with your identity, body,
everything in this society
you airdropped into, and I
was flying the same fighter
jet as you with one engine
out and all the shit exploding
all around me, I
would do no better.
I would do no better.
What I tell that single mom
that pulled me from meditation
into healing, kicking
and screaming,
chickenshit coward that I am--
I was like, if I were
flying your fighter jet,
I'd be dead by now.
I don't have the constitution
and endurance that you have.
I'd be dead.
You are like a--
I want to, like, steal your
DNA and save it for posterity.
You're unkillable.
So I have huge admiration
for so many of the people
I advise and work with.
The image I often give--
I don't play golf myself, but
it's like they are the golfer.
I'm the caddy.
I'm advising.
This is their round.
And when they hit one
that splits the fairway,
I'm just like [WHISTLES].
I'm as deep in
admiration as anyone--
probably more, because I know
what the wind conditions are
and how awful it is.
And they're still
able to do that.
And they give themselves
no credit for it.
And I'm like, no, you
need to take a pause.
It's like, that
was unbelievable.
I could never make
that shot, and I'm
on this golf course
all day long.
So it's this huge sense of
just joy and wonder when
I see people and they realize
these core deep things,
that there's nothing
wrong with them,
and the job they're doing
flying what they're flying
is incredible.
It's world-class.
It's olympian.
And they would
have never imagined
to even think of it that way.
And I'm like, but just
look at the facts.
I'm like the little
lawyer in their heads.
I'm just making the case.
And I'm the expert.
I see this all day long.
I have all the data points.
And I'm telling you, I would
not still be aloft in the air
if I were in your F-16.
And they're like, OK.
So for all the things
they've gone through,
they have this pride
of craftsmanship.
It's just the reality.
So they're like, OK, instead
of beating themselves up,
they put all that aside.
It's like, all
right, well, let's
pop the hood again and
take a look at this
and see what we can do.
Maybe nothing more,
and that's fine.
We'll just drive it as it is.
They relax and they're like,
just take another look.
Put it back up on
the whiteboard.
Let's take another look.
And I'm like, great.
Let's roll.
Let's do it.
>> You're a little bit
like their self-love coach,
in a way.
It's OK.
You're doing a great job.
Maybe they haven't heard
that for so long, right?
And it's nice to hear,
because like you say,
that's that ultimate negative
voice is not good enough.
And it gets reaffirmed
by the culture
and reaffirmed by everybody.
It's like, no, actually,
you're doing a good job.
>> One thing I want to say about
that is I don't teach anyone
self-love.
I don't teach anyone self-love.
I am the defense
attorney to defend
and advocate the fact
that self-love is already
in the room.
You don't need to learn it.
It's already in you.
And my proof for
that is very simple.
It's that if you're suffering
with these wounds and childhood
traumas and hard day at work
and, oh, my relationships
are falling apart and you feel
like you're just burning alive,
the fact that you are like this,
grasping around, looking around
for any kind of relief, that's
Exhibit A. You love yourself.
You love yourself.
Because the converse,
the alternative is that--
because people are like,
I have self-loathing.
I hate myself.
It's like, well, actually, no.
The fact you're
even talking to me
means that you're
looking for a solution.
And so if I were truly
the villainous archenemy
and I truly hated you, if
I saw you burning alive
I wouldn't lift a finger.
I might step out and get
some popcorn and a soda
to sit back and enjoy the show,
but I wouldn't do anything.
I think it was Napoleon who said
the worst thing a general can
do is interrupt their
rival when they're
in the process of shooting
themselves in the foot.
When your enemy is screwing
up, don't interfere.
So if I really hated you
and you were burning alive,
I would let you burn.
And you don't do
that to yourself.
The more you burn, the more
despicable things you do--
I'm guilty, I'm
this monster, I'm
a piece of shit, blah,
blah, blah, blah--
you still reach out.
There's a style, and
there's no accounting
for-- you may reach for
things that are bad for you
and don't really work.
But you do reach for
something, right?
And that's self-love.
And that self-love it's
pretty damn unconditional.
And I want to be very
careful when I say this,
but sometimes people are like,
I'm at the end of my rope.
I just want to end it all.
And I'm like, even that
can at a certain level
be interpreted as a misguided--
misguided-- form of
self-love, because you
want the pain to end.
And that is its own
form of self-love.
Now, I'm not advocating
that, because it's misguided.
And I'll explain
why in a minute.
But again, if I'm your enemy
and I'm watching you burn alive,
my most fervent wish is
for your immortality.
I want you to stay alive.
I don't want you to die, because
I don't want your pain to end.
And so when I feel
like I'm burning alive
and I'm like, well,
maybe one option
would be to just end
everything, that's
still a misguided
form of self-love,
because you're still trying
to make the pain go away.
The only difference is
you've run out of ideas.
But I mean, as we
all know, if you just
think about your
own life experience,
if you sit there
long enough in pain,
you will come up
with more ideas.
Necessity is the
mother of invention.
If you just sit there
for long enough,
the necessity of your pain will
come up with new ways, at least
new things to try.
Your creativity will be fired
up, for better or worse.
So that's why I'm always like--
you know, that's
never an answer.
Because in my opinion, you
were put here for a reason.
Your mission, if you
choose to accept it,
is to find that reason and
fulfill it, if you can.
And if you're gone,
then the game's over.
And that's no fun.
So just sit.
I know it's painful.
Just sit and see
what else comes.
And something always comes.
Something always comes.
>> Or someone comes to you.
>> Or someone.
>> One concept that I really
resonated with well and I think
a lot of people understand--
and I think it's similar to this
mask ideology, or
this mask theory--
is this locked up board member.
I'm a huge fan of it, because I
think it's such a practical way
to dig into the psyche.
And if I use different
examples, like my parents
might have said or someone--
like, if you go do this,
if you go get a good job,
we'll love you.
I used to play in
punk rock bands.
I love fast, melodic punk, like
Lagwagon, No Use for a Name,
NOFX, these sort of things.
Loved it.
I played with two boys I
connected with really well
on music.
We played gigs, recorded albums.
My parents are like, you can't
make money doing that, Ryan.
I mean, punk rock is a
niche within a niche, right?
And it's also like, yeah, no,
you have to go get a real job.
And when you do that and
get all your qualifications,
then you're doing a good job.
AKA, we'll love you.
Or in the case of
speaking to specificity,
because it's easy when you
do that, Laurentine, my wife,
she grew up with this father
who was a banker and a financier
and living all around the world.
And he's like, well,
my eldest son--
it was meant to be a son, but
it was a daughter, you know?
You will go study
law in Switzerland,
because that's what
upstanding Dutch families do.
So she was sent to a
law school at a nunnery.
And it was taught
in German, which
is like her fourth language.
And it's like, go be a
good girl and do that,
and then you'll
be worthy of love.
And she's a great artist.
She wanted to study
psychology or anthropology
and human behavior, things
that we're into now.
But that board
member got locked up
for the sake of
pleasing her father.
And so did my
creative board member.
Luckily, I took a guitar
with me on my career.
So I kept playing.
But then you get to this stage
where it's like, actually, I
want to go get that
guy out of the closet
and say it's OK to come back.
And when you come
back, you start
to just angle that
a little bit more
slightly towards
your bliss, which
is an interesting journey.
So I love that ideology.
I think it should be a
book in and unto itself.
Tell me about how we
lock up a board member,
and how that
happens and the cost
that that can come in our lives.
>> So the million dollar
question when we talk about
soothing and shielding is
asked by one in 1,000 people I
encounter.
And that's fine.
It just shows you how not in
the forefront of our minds
thinking like this is.
But every now and
then someone will ask,
well, it's great to soothe
differently and shield
differently, to optimize how
we're managing the wound,
like numbing it
with better value
and shielding it
with better value.
But is there a way to actually
just heal the wound itself?
Because if you could
heal the wound,
and you wouldn't need to
soothe or shield at all.
And I don't know if
that's possible, but is
that even an option?
And I'm like, I want to
talk to you after the talk.
I want to take a reading
of your brain to understand
how that came out.
And so after we do some
just quick optimization
of your soothing and
shielding, just so you're good,
you're stable for like a few
weeks, then we pop the hood
and go into looking
at the actual wound.
And the way I describe the
wound is the following.
The way I think
about it is that--
and this is an image
from my corporate days--
we all have like what
is metaphorically
like a board of directors
within us, where we're the CEO.
And there are a number of
characters on this board.
There's a chief of
security to make
sure you don't get
hit by a bus when
you walk out on the street.
There's your creativity.
There's the one in
charge of making
sure you get prestige
and are not humiliated.
Your body is a board member.
Your muse, if you
think of it that way,
can be a board member.
And basically, all
the sort of major life
forces you identify as
such are board members.
So in the more
nuanced cases, money
itself can be seen
as a board member.
So if you have money
blocks or fear of money,
it is that board
member being exiled.
And so the way the
wounding happens
then is that when you're
told to put this mask on
and you're like, shit,
I'm going to lose love--
I've got a gun to my
head, so I'll put it on--
there will be parts
of you that stick out,
because the mask is not organic.
The mask is fashioned by society
for its own machine purposes.
And that's fine.
But when you put it
on, you'll realize
that there are certain
parts of you that don't fit,
that stick out.
And in many cases, allowing
those parts of you to stick out
is punished as much as
if you took a mask off,
because it's ruining my
suspension of disbelief.
You're a good boy.
You're an upstanding
Swiss legal expert
that will help manage
the family, our clients
and everything.
You can perhaps paint
as a hobby on the side.
I don't want to hear
anything about it.
And certainly, you cannot let
that bleed over and impinge
and degrade your
professional persona.
Very standard reading
of the riot act, right?
And comply with all of this
with a bow on top, or else you
will lose love.
And so caddle prod is
hit, and we start running.
And again, that's
just the fighter jet.
If you were in her position,
if I were in her position,
we would do no better.
I mean, given her path, we
would probably do a lot worse.
So the thing is, you get that
cattle prod enough times,
pretty soon an emergency meeting
of the board of directors
is called.
And the chief of security--
in this day and age,
I might even say the chief
of Homeland Security--
makes an announcement
and says, look,
I know we all have
our roles, and we're
all life tenured members of
the board and everything.
But we've got a serious
life-or-death situation
on our hands.
If our dad looks at
us like that again,
there could be real trouble.
If our mom looks at us with
that look of disappointment,
there could be trouble.
And there is a part of our
deep biological chassis
that knows that if we
are rejected enough
and we don't comply to it
past of certain extreme,
we could lose our lives.
We'll be left on the
hillside to freeze or be
fed to the wolves or whatever.
And a civilized person
maybe will be like, well,
this is 2019.
We don't do that anymore.
Well, actually, there's 7
billion people on the planet.
Most of them live without
electricity or running water.
This still happens all the time.
Kids are given up in orphanages,
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
So it's not unreasonable
that as human beings,
we come with a safety
code of looking out for,
especially as a child, signs
that we are being rejected
and not compliant, signs
that we're being shamed.
And shame is the feeling that
there's something intrinsically
wrong with me--
as opposed to guilt,
which is like, oh,
I spilled coffee on your iPhone.
I'm sorry, let me
make it up to you.
I'll send my guy out to do your
data transfer and everything.
I'll buy you the next model.
That's guilt. Transactional
difference, easy to realign.
Shame is different.
Shame is where there's a
feeling that there's something
intrinsically wrong with me.
There's something the
fuck wrong with me.
And the iPhone example
would be if you got up
to get a glass of water,
if you came back, I
didn't damage your iPhone.
I was actually scrolling
through your texts.
And if we found ourselves
in that situation,
I would hand the
phone back to you.
You'd still have your phone.
No economic or
financial degradation.
There's no imbalance.
But we are not
OK, because you've
realized there's something
the fuck wrong with me.
And that's shame.
That's shame.
So when we look out for
the people around us who
are protecting us
and feeding us,
thinking there's
something wrong with us,
we're constantly looking
out for that threshold.
If we cross a certain
threshold, we're dead.
And we have to do
something about it.
Then you call the emergency
meeting of the board members
and you say, look, we're
young men in this family.
Everyone in this family
is bankers and lawyers.
It's just the way it is.
You've benefited
from all that sort
of privilege and economic
resource and education,
so don't complain.
But if our dad looks
at us like that again,
there's going to
be serious trouble.
And we've called you here to
this emergency board meeting,
because I'm sorry, we're going
to have to declare martial law.
And you, punk rocker, you
guitar-playing artist, and you,
long hair--
definitely, you the long hair--
you guys are voted
off the island.
Security, escort them
into the cafeteria.
Sequester them there
until further notice,
which is like forever.
The rest of you, ignore
the banging on the door.
Carry on with the meeting.
So when these board members
within you are exiled,
it's done out of love.
It's not malicious.
It's done out of love and a
well-meaning but panicked fear.
OK?
And again, there's no mistake.
If you or I were
flying that F-16,
we would do the same thing.
But the cost and the upshot
is that we have this compass,
and three load stones are out.
So the compass is decalibrated,
let's say, about 15%
off of true north.
And so with this
decalibrated compass,
you make all these
same decisions,
because you've got to
get on with your life.
Who I'm going to marry, what
kind of job I'm going to take,
what kind of
external persona I'm
going to wear and present
to the outside world
in different situations.
What situations,
what milieu I'll
even choose to
insert myself into,
which require different
kinds of masks.
You make all these choices
with a compass that
is decalibrated just about 15%.
15% is about this much.
And when you deviate two or
three years out of college,
that's no big deal.
You fast forward that
another 15 to 20 years,
you're way off mark.
And at around about midlife,
you realize, holy crap.
I'm way off.
And some of us
continue, and some of us
decide to take off the mask and
take a hard left turn, which
ends up breaking a lot of shit.
So it's not a decision
to be taken lightly.
Most of us are pushed into
it kicking and screaming.
But then you start making your
way back to the original track.
And so the question basically
boils down to, to what extent
can you get a reading on
what board member or board
members were exiled in
order to keep your mask on?
And are you able to actually
recover them and bring them
back into the boat with you?
And there's a funny thing
with these board members.
They are life-tenured.
And as a board member, even
if you lock me in the closet,
my card key opens every
door in the building.
So when you lock me in
there and I stay in there,
it's because I'm complicit.
You know, I'm the punk rocker
guitar-playing guy in you
and I'm like, well, shit,
I'd better stay in here.
Because I love everyone too.
Everyone loves you within
you, because they do.
They're a part of you.
But also, to be
crass, their interests
are very aligned with
you, because if you die,
they die too.
We're all in line here.
And so what will often happen
is that several years, sometimes
decades will go by.
The board members who are
sitting in the prison cell
start to look at each
other and say, hey, Fred.
I don't think they're
coming back for us.
It's always the softest,
most sensitive ones
that are the most
gullible, right?
And they start to
decide to take action.
So they do have full access
to all the resources,
and they have access to
all the levers down there.
So they can pull
an emergency brake.
I'll just rattle off
hypothetical metaphorical
things.
They can get you
fired from your job.
They can give you panic attacks
before you go into meetings.
They can make you wander
off with other people
to break off a relationship
that you don't want to be in.
They can throw out your back.
They can give you rashes.
They can give you
heart palpitations.
All these kinds of
things, metaphorically,
can be interpreted
often in hindsight
as, I wasn't listening.
I kept stuffing them
down, and they came up
and pulled the emergency brake.
And often in hindsight when
they're like, OK, fine.
I've finally recovered
this board member.
I've talked to them.
I've let them have
their day in court.
And when they give
their side of the story,
you realize that they
had a just grievance.
And they only pulled the
emergency brake very, very
begrudgingly, because all the
other attempts to email you,
text you, everything
was blocked.
You marked them as spam.
You blocked them.
And they just had to
continue escalating,
because as far as
they're concerned--
as far as the entire
board is concerned--
you all parachuted in
here to find and prosecute
your meaning and purpose in
your life for your bliss.
And whatever wound was given
to you was part of the compass.
And now you're following in
the direction of the wound
instead of letting the wound
guide you, because you're
stuffing it down.
And so that pain
you feel, that is
the lost board member stuffed
down, banging on the door.
And that's why you need
to numb it so powerfully
and with so many
different methods.
And that's why you need to
shield it from being poked,
because god forbid anybody
see that you're actually
a musician.
And you know, you're
working in this,
whatever, like accounting firm.
Not to bash on
accounting firms, but.
You can't let anyone see that,
because if they point that out,
it just rips, just pulls
the wound right open.
You don't even want to
look at it yourself.
Why would you?
Not just because it's
painful, but because you've
been told in no uncertain
terms that even looking at it,
thinking about it, will
make you unworthy of love.
So it's like, if that's
what's on the table,
I will cut my own
arm off if I can.
But you can't.
That part of you doesn't
die until you die.
And even then, who knows?
So these board members
are unkillable.
If they were killable,
the world would
be a very different place.
We would all be, I don't know,
mechanized and completely
on the path we're
on, and everyone
would be happy with it.
There would be no health issues.
There would be no
environmental disaster.
There would be nothing.
We'd all just be parts in
the machine and fine with it.
>> But that's not
the case, right?
>> I don't think
that's the case.
>> And so once this illusion
that love is not conditional
and that it resides within self
and that it's always been from
others, is that then, either
through that realization,
is it then in that process
you start to play with these
[INAUDIBLE]?
Oh my goodness, this is so fun.
I can actually do more
of what I love to do now.
Or can actually identifying
a locked up board member--
like say it was the artist.
Say you were a creative
artist as a child.
You loved art.
Your father said,
don't be stupid.
You've got to get
a job as a lawyer.
And then you go do that and
you're like, I'm not happy.
And then you go, I locked
that board member up
when I was eight or nine.
I remember when I was
16 and my dad said,
don't go to art school.
Go to this.
What if you just
started painting again?
Does that help you retouch
base with that core essence
of who you are?
Can that be a healing process,
to just let that liberate?
>> Absolutely.
Absolutely.
But there are caveats.
So in a sense, you could
say if it were that simple,
everyone would just do it.
Many people do.
But you've got to remember that
this is a board of directors.
And they all love you,
and they are all sworn.
They would do anything for you.
They'll do things that are
monstrous to your own self,
exiling other board members.
They will do monstrous things to
other people in the outer world
to keep you safe and put
you in a thriving position.
They're very selfish, jealously
guarding and loving you.
And this is all
the board members,
even the board members who
exiled your lost board member.
So when you start
painting again--
or more likely, when you start
thinking about painting again--
the bully, protector
side of the board
will be like, now wait
just a goddamn minute here.
Your dad doesn't need to
be around to remind you.
You've got your dad within
you as a board member.
Even when men and
women are in their 70s
and their parents are long gone
from this world, they're like,
I can still hear my dad saying
that damn thing he always
said like it was yesterday,
like it was half an hour ago.
And that's your own
inner board member--
in that case, your inner
masculine board member--
scripted and
programmed by your dad.
So the things that says to
you, a, are not your fault.
They're technically
not your dad's fault
either, because he wasn't
born talking like that.
He learned it from someone.
You inherit it like you inherit
your eye color, your hair
color, the foods
you eat at holiday,
what holidays you actually--
you inherit all these things.
And it's no one's fault.
But you get this thing, and
it is a voice within you,
and it has authority and power.
So if you can get the board to
even approve the authorization
to get yourself some
paints and paint,
oftentimes people
will think about it
and agonize over it for months.
It'll put it out.
Some emergency at
work will happen,
and they'll forget everything
for another six weeks.
And then they'll
finally get around
to some post-it they wrote
to themselves saying,
maybe I can start
painting again.
And even then, they'll push
it off three or four times.
Finally, they'll go
to the art store,
like, breaking out in hives
while they're doing it.
Pick up one canvas
and just one starter,
eight-color acrylic set.
And they'll bring it home,
they'll put it there,
and it will go untouched
for another two months.
Why is that?
People are like,
what's the big deal?
It's nothing.
And the answer is,
it's not nothing.
You have this
artist board member
that's like, I just need to--
I'm turning blue.
I just need to loosen a little
bit to get a little bit of air.
I'm not going to
threaten the empire.
threaten the status quo.
I just need a little bit of air.
And if not, I will
pull this lever that
will throw your back out
again so you're lying down
and I can really
work on you to, like,
at least get an easel
in your hospital bed.
I'm making this up, but
it's the physics of it.
And so there is this constant
back-and-forth debate,
because it's not just,
oh, rainbows and unicorns,
let the artist back.
It's like, let the artist back.
That's a big deal.
There's a reason she was
exiled in the first place.
It's because you have
this hanging sword of,
you will be unworthy of love.
You will disappoint
your parents,
you'll break their hearts, and
you'll be unworthy of love.
Oh, and by the
way, the spouse you
married on this
pretext of you will
be this banker or whatever,
she'll leave you too,
and you'll break your family.
You'll hurt your children.
They'll inherit the
wound going forward.
You'll fuck them up too.
It's not a trivial thing to
just go out and start painting
again.
So when people say, oh,
just follow your passions,
follow your bliss,
it's no big deal,
and they wag their fingers
at them, I'm like, dude,
don't do that.
It's not trivial to
do this, and it's not
a decision to be taken lightly.
And so for me, from my
corporate days, when
you have a conflict
at the board level,
the worst way to solve it is
through a brute force pissing
match, because you create
strife within the board.
And you lose sight of the fact
that we're all shareholders
in this entity.
We all want it to succeed.
And when we disagree,
it's not good
or evil or loving or malicious.
It is all loving and simply
in disagreement on areas where
reasonable minds will differ.
I don't want to lose love.
I also don't want to not express
my true meaning and purpose
in life.
Right?
So for me, what I am is
a boardroom consultant.
I'm not a board member.
I don't have a vote.
But I do come in and
help people start talking
to these parts of
themselves to basically say,
even if you get to the point
where you just draw the battle
lines--
like, we want money.
We want prestige.
We want comfort,
material comfort.
We want the ability
to shut dad up,
because now he's
asking us for money.
So that's nice.
Shuts the old man up, right?
But on the artist's
side, it's like, I
need to express
this, this, and this.
And if you are so afraid
of it that you only
take a fleeting
glance, it just looks
like the irresistible
force hitting
against the immovable object.
At 30,000 feet, that's
what it all looks like.
But if you give yourself
permission to say, look,
it's the F-16.
Everyone's-- it's my thing.
Let me just look at it.
It will be uncomfortable.
Because when you heal
something, it itches.
But that's a good sign.
It will be uncomfortable.
But when you get in there,
even drawing up the battle
lines is huge progress,
because then at least you
know what each
side wants, and you
can start the negotiation
and potential compromise.
And I've found
that there's always
a way to thread the needle.
I've never found a
case where it was not
possible to thread the needle.
And what I mean by that is--
I've never seen the dice
throw of the universe end
up where a person is
born into this world
and they're given a bliss that
is completely incompatible
with life, the
practicalities of life.
I've never seen it.
And the reason why the
occurrence and fulfillment
of bliss is so low in
humanity at this point--
and it just is what it
is; we are where we are--
is that we're shamed.
We're taught that if you look
at this, if you have this,
there's something
wrong with you.
There's something wrong-- we
come from seven generations
of bankers and lawyers.
Where did you come from,
this guitar-playing musician?
Are you even my son?
I mean, you look like
me, but I don't know.
What that's hiding
is there were also
seven generations of musicians.
We just don't talk about
that, and you're not
going to talk about it either.
So basically, we're taught
that if we have this bliss,
there's something wrong with us.
We will lose love.
There's all this
fear surrounding it,
so that we don't even look
at the sight of the wound
or area in question, what was
exiled, what was pushed off.
And that's 99% of the problem.
And the metaphor I always
use is, even a paper cut,
if you don't attend to it, and
let it get infected and fester,
even a paper cut can kill you.
It's like the
saying, the cover-up
is worse than the crime.
If the original thing was just
a paper cut, just look at it.
It's a little uncomfortable.
Put the right things on it.
Give it some air and light, and
it will just heal on its own.
And it's like, oh, I can make
gobs of money and do my bliss.
Haha, let's just do this.
Why didn't I think
of this before?
It's like, OK,
bully, sit back down.
OK, sorry, sorry.
Let's just keep going.
Just keep going.
It's the feast.
All you can eat,
just keep eating.
Sometimes it's a bigger wound.
But that just needs a
little bit more stitching.
We have miles of thread,
suture, and needles.
It's the fear of looking at it
that makes even the smallest
incompatibilities flare up
into life and bliss and meaning
and purpose of life,
threatening conflagrations,
if that makes sense.
>> It is something
that we don't look at.
I'm not sure if
you speak to this,
but I think it is interesting.
A lot of people have this
sense of lack of self-worth,
a lack of self-love
from abandonment issues
or actually being abandoned,
or something significant
happening to them.
In that instance, do you
recommend a similar process
of analysis around it, like
going through and finding out,
well, that's my core wound.
OK, that's great.
And then how can I attend to
that on a needs by needs basis?
How do you approach that?
>> Yeah.
So one of the
things I tell people
is that the nature of what
I do, even in healing,
is just general advising.
It's not medical.
It's not any of that.
And often people will
say, after they've
done some of these
exercises, they're like,
I think I understand now
what therapy is meant to do.
And I think I want
to go to therapy.
And I'm like, that's awesome.
Go do that.
And I'll give them some pointers
around, it's like speed-dating.
You need to try a
lot of different ones
to find the right chemistry.
So if the first therapist
you meet is like judgey
and you don't feel comfortable
with them, that's OK.
Keep going.
Keep looking.
So what I do is just
general advising
to give a different kind
of perspective on that.
And in the framework of lost
board members and things
like that, the way I
tend to think about it
is that when a traumatic
event happens--
at any point in life, but
especially in early life--
the key thing that is
the wound, to me, that
is the aspect that
is of most interest
to me and the advising work that
I do to get you back on track
to your bliss, is
the narrative that
emerges around this
thing that happens, where
any human being of any
age, their natural reaction
is like, what the hell was that?
What the hell just happened?
So as a child, it could be
an event that you witness.
It could be a trauma, an assault
that you are the victim of.
It could be just something
bad that happens.
You're a villager, and a
hurricane comes and destroys
the entire village.
I mean, there's examples I'm
thinking of where, in one case,
the traumatic event
for an advisee of mine
was the fact that
at three years old--
and he didn't remember any of
this-- but at three years old,
he had to move
across the Atlantic
from Britain to
the United States
and was separated from a parent.
It was just two careers, and
they were working it out.
But that for him was
the traumatic event.
Even though he had no
recollection of it,
it was the narrative
that grew up
around this that became
the source of the wound.
And he didn't remember it.
It was a narrative.
But the narrative itself
was just as powerful.
Another example is a
man who, when he was 13,
his mother committed suicide.
And the day before,
she had asked
him to show him how to use the
gun that she then the next day
used to commit suicide.
He was a gun owner, a competent
marksman trained by his father.
And at 13, he bore
the burden of that.
All of the sort of power
and energy around that event
was in the narrative that
grows up around that,
where it's like, my mom--
I mean, you can come up
with an infinite number
of permutations.
But on one extreme, you
could say, I was just 13.
I didn't know any better.
Your mom tells you to show her
how to work the can opener,
you do it.
You're a good son, your mom
loves you and everything,
as opposed to like,
I helped kill my mom.
That was me.
I'm a bad person.
There's something wrong with me.
I'm too gullible.
I'm too stupid, and I'm
not looking out for things
that I need to be aware of.
And so for me--
>> So really, to add to this,
because this is interesting,
narrative is meaning, right?
>> Yeah.
>> So we're appending a
meaning to a situation,
whether it's true or not.
And then we live
our lives by that.
Is that correct?
Can you connect the
meaning/narrative thing
together?
>> Well, from the perspective
of the board of directors,
that's your intel.
So we're the board of directors.
We will defend, hell
or high water, you,
your path in life, your safety,
security, your prestige--
all of the Maslow kind of--
survival, security.
What is it?
Relationships,
prestige, and some form
of personal development.
We're going to take care of
all those basic needs for you,
no matter what.
And now we're
scanning the horizon.
Oh, this huge
mushroom cloud just
went off over there in the
form of some traumatic event.
That impacts us.
And we need to
understand, we need
to come up with a narrative
of what the hell happened,
why it happened, and
what our role was
in it to make sure we come
up with a contingency plan
to make sure that shit
never happens again.
That's the job of the board.
Economic recession-- that's
definitely bad for us.
How do we make sure
we don't contribute
to the next recession?
It's absurd.
You have no control over it.
But it's like, maybe we'll
consult with the president
and put our cronies
in Congress and make
sure they pass the
right laws to make
sure this never happens again.
So narrative becomes
the intel by which
the board runs your
company and navigates
the path of your life.
And this is a human
phenomenon, right?
So forget about children.
Grown adults,
members of a tribe--
a hurricane comes by twice a
year and wipes out the village.
If you and I are in that
village, how would we react?
Oh yeah, whatever.
That happens every six months.
No big deal.
Let's just rebuild the village.
Hell no.
We're like, we have to
come up with a narrative.
The gods are angry with us.
We need to sacrifice more.
The next village's
shaman did a thing on us.
We gotta go take care of him.
We must come up
with a narrative,
because in the absence of that
narrative we have no control.
If we have no control,
we're unshielded.
We're unsoothed,
and a lightning bolt
can hit us at any time--
which is actually true.
A lightning bolt can
hit you at any time.
But we come up with
a narrative saying,
oh, it's more dangerous riding
in your car, so don't worry.
Even lightning bolt,
which will never happen,
we have to come up
with a narrative
to soothe and shield ourselves.
This is a human thing.
Similarly then, as a child--
as a child, you're
also not stupid.
Parents are all the time
like, I don't get how
my kid understands all this.
You're explaining this to me.
I was like, no way.
And then I tell them, you're
loved unconditionally,
and they understand,
and they brighten up,
and all these things
just fall away.
I don't even understand.
I'm like, dude, he's your kid.
Did you go to Princeton or what?
He is smart like
you, and it's OK.
So kids are going
to be like this too.
And when something bad
happens in their life--
my mom commits suicide, I
get moved across the Atlantic
against my will--
they can't just take it
as a random occurrence.
It's too frightening.
They have to come
up with a narrative.
And in my experience, my kind
of unprofessional observation
of these things,
what I notice is
that the narrative
that a child comes up
with in the absence of
guidance from the elder
is almost always self-negative.
And when I've talked actually
to children and I've talked
to grown-ups and asked them
why they came up with that
narrative when
they were children,
what I've pieced together
is that if there is a choice
between a narrative where I had
no control versus I had some
control, I will always-- because
I'm smart and I'm capable
intrinsically, because
I'm not an idiot--
I will always skew
toward the narrative that
put more control in my hands.
And the reason I prefer that is
because it gives me something
to do to make me feel like I'm
preventing the next occurrence.
Even if it's rubbing
my lucky rabbit's foot
or putting baby powder
on my hockey stick,
I need something to
do to feel like I'm
at least doing something.
Even if you're like, well, it's
not true, it doesn't matter.
Given the choice between,
yeah, can't do anything.
Could happen again.
Any minute, you could be
eating your chocolate pudding
and it could just happen.
It's like, fuck, OK.
That's not the world
I want to live in.
I want to live in a world where
I can do something to prevent
these things from happening.
I will choose that.
And in these bad instances--
the kid whose mom
killed themself
with the gun he showed
her how to use--
what is the narrative
where he has control,
where it's like, no, I was just
this helpless kid and my mom
like--
there's a lot of things my
mom shouldn't have done.
But one of the things is that
she shouldn't have used me
as a means to helping her.
Putting that on her.
Or putting it on me, it's
like, if I had paid attention,
I wouldn't have shown her and
I would have gone to my dad.
And the reason why a kid,
in the absence of guidance,
will pick that is because it
gives his board of directors
something to do to
prevent the next one.
Now, the very painful and
damaging byproduct of that
is that it puts
the blame on him,
because the price of
control is responsibility.
So to protect myself, I'm
going to take on the narrative
where I have control.
Then it's like, fucking
it was partly my fault.
And then that is a wound.
Because if I caused that, then
there's something in my board.
And in that case, it might be
inattentiveness, incompetence,
non-vigilance, gullibility.
Those board members will
all get shunted down
to the lowest level of
Guantanamo prison, right?
And not unreasonably.
And that boy's compass
will be calibrated 15%
or whatever it is, and he'll go
through life until he's like,
I'm nowhere near where I need
to be and I don't even know why.
So for me, even
traumatic events--
if there's trauma,
narrative absolutely
has to rise up around that,
because you can't ignore it.
This Eiffel Tower emerges out
of the ground next to you.
You have to talk about it
and explain it somehow.
But in the absence
of trauma, you
don't need a trauma to come
up with your narrative.
It's like, put this mask on.
No, James, put it back on.
No, I can see it's off.
Put it back on.
Cut your hair.
And you're trying all--
and it's like, oh, fine.
And then a narrative
will come up right there.
It doesn't have to be trauma,
but trauma is definitely
an exceptional case in my
travels what I've seen.
>> Interesting.
There are a few other things
I want to speak to at the end
here, which is sort of
really about wrapping up
vision, mission, next
step, because we've
covered a lot of time here.
So I want to be
respectful of that.
And you touched on this a
little bit at the start.
How do we solve this problem?
I hear these stories.
I speak with parenting experts.
I speak with psychologists,
psychiatrists.
And I'm like, oh my goodness.
We just need to become
conscious parents
and raise children that don't
have any lack of self-worth.
But then you can't
always do that,
because they come up
with their own reasons
to find a lack of
self-worth, right?
>> Right.
>> But then there's meditation,
which you can quiet the chatter
and start to tap into that more
internal wellspring of peace,
love, and energy that
resides within all of us,
which is more of the
spiritual ideology.
So speaking to all of
this, in your opinion--
and I'm not going to ask for
a professional opinion or this
or that.
Just in your
experience and opinion,
how do you think we start
to evolve as a species
to really go, oh,
actually, I am pure love.
I am pure light.
I am divinity, as
is everybody else.
And in that knowledge,
we can start
to be more
compassionate to others
and help them to not
develop the wounds
that we've sort of carried?
Is that a possibility?
Is that your vision?
Or is it more of a
bliss-based ideology
where people move towards
bliss through meditation,
chanting, whatever it
is, and then they go,
oh my goodness, I can
be that person now?
How do you think we get out
of this mess, essentially,
and sort of
self-evolved to a place
where we can operate as better
quality humans on this planet?
>> Mm-hmm, thank you for that.
So for me, there's really
only one thing out of which
bliss itself will emerge.
And that is that sort of the
deeper and deeper understanding
that I as a person,
whoever you are--
it's not even that
I'm worthy of love.
I am actually loved without
condition, period, full stop.
There is no condition.
And that's the only switch
that needs to be flipped.
And the two things
I'll say with that
are an example of
what that means
to be loved unconditionally,
and then once you
have that, how that starts
to change things around you.
Many years ago when I was
walking with my daughter after
dinner, we would have this
habit of doing one-on-one walks
for like an hour or
two after dinner,
like three or four
times a week actually--
I would ask her these questions,
just to calibrate and see
where she was at.
And I would say, you get that
I love you without condition,
right?
She's like, yeah, dad, yeah.
Because my kids, they roll
their eyes at this stuff.
They hear it so much.
And I'm like, so
I mean, you know
that that means if you get
straight F's on your report
card, you drop out of school
and you're a street person,
you don't lose any love.
I'm worried about your
safety and everything,
but you don't lose any love.
It doesn't matter if you fail.
And she's like,
yeah, I got that.
I got that.
I'm good.
And I'm like, OK.
Well, do you get the converse,
where if you get straight A's--
ace everything, get into
all the best schools,
and win the Nobel Prize--
your stock price doesn't go up?
I don't love you any
more, because your love
is unconditional.
And she was like
[MIMICS EXPLOSION]
So it's like, yeah, yeah, yeah.
If you don't get into Harvard,
as an example, or Stanford,
you don't lose any love.
But if you do get in,
you don't gain any love,
because love is not conditional.
It's not a stock price.
It doesn't go down.
It also doesn't go up.
I already would die for you.
It's maxed without condition.
Similarly, I'll ask my son.
I'll ask him every now and
then still just for kicks.
But when he was younger, we
would be doing all this stuff
for him.
I'm basically his butler.
I'll cook for him
and everything.
And I'm like, how you doing?
Do you feel loved?
He's like, oh
yeah, I feel loved.
He's eating his mac
and cheese or whatever.
And when he was younger, I would
say, I'm glad you feel loved.
So do you know what you
need to be doing in order
to continue having this love?
And he was like, what?
And I was like, nothing.
You don't earn your love.
You get it.
And a big smile cracked
across his face.
And now of course,
he's a teenager.
So when I even dare to voice
it, I'm like, do you know?
He's like, yeah, nothing.
Which is really annoying.
But that's exactly where
you want them to be.
So when you realize your
love is unconditional--
and when I teach, there's
like 50 different ways
of trying to reach in and flip
the switch within any given
advisee, because there's a lot
of defenses and countervailing
knowledge and
teaching and scripting
and conditioning
that's against that.
But once you can
reach in and kind of
help the person flip
that switch, where
they realize the reality--
or even where they're like,
oh my gosh, I'm out of ideas.
I'm just going to hurt myself.
Even that is out of a
misguided sense of self-love.
That's what that feels like.
And then from that
feeling, the way
that changes the physics
of your life is that--
I mean, a very
fundamental level,
you're, first of all,
not afraid of anything.
Because if I quit my job
and I don't make any money,
it means, well, I'm
making less money,
so I need to tighten my
belt. For most people,
it doesn't mean they'll starve.
And even if they do
starve, friends, family,
the government,
whatever-- typically,
there's a level of money below
which all the shame factors
and loss of love kick in, which
is way above what you actually
need to live and survive.
That delta is fine.
It's fine to have
that difference there.
But the key is that
the things you do out
of a fear of loss of love--
when you truly flip
the switch to say,
actually, it's not possible
for me to lose love--
all the things you were
doing based on that fear
instantly fall away.
And if we go back to
soothing and shielding,
let's just look at the list--
money and prestige,
perfectionism, anger,
invisibility, people-pleasing,
sex and drugs, shopping,
alcohol, unhealthy sex
and relationships--
all those things fall away.
Actually, at a business
school talk I was doing,
someone circled a number of the
items on soothing and shielding
and said, what I've
just circled constitutes
around 85% of US gross
domestic product.
And I was like, yeah,
and I'm OK with that.
I love the world
without condition.
I love it as it is.
I play the ball as it lies.
But the thing is,
because that's the case--
the world is driven by fear--
when you flip the switch
within yourself to realize,
actually, I can't lose love.
I can bang my head against
the wall all day long,
I can't lose love.
All the things you
were doing fall away,
because you were doing
that out of fear.
You realize, 80% of my life,
I'm doing things out of fear.
All those things fall away, and
then you shift into neutral.
There's typically a two-
or three-week period--
for some people longer,
which is delicious--
where they're sitting
there and they're like,
I'm not doing anything.
I've lost all motivation.
I'm going into work like Neo,
Keanu Reeves in "The Matrix."
He's, like, fighting
kung fu with one hand
and still pulling in the money.
He's still getting promoted.
Everything's fine.
He's not driven by fear.
He's just phoning it in.
And everyone still
gathers around him,
because there's this
weird light around him
now, because he's
impervious to fear.
And people smell that
and gather around you.
But they're like, it's like
I've lost all motivation.
And I'm just sitting here.
Everything's fine, and I
kind of don't give a shit.
Is this OK?
There's something wrong with me.
And of course, it's me.
So I'm like, no, there's
nothing wrong with you.
But what has happened is
you've lost your fear.
So all the things you were
doing motivated by the fear
have stopped dead in the water.
And voila, you're still alive.
People who love
you still love you.
Everything's fine.
You're not starving.
No one's come to
your rescue, yet.
And then, as you sit
there for long enough,
this other muscle will start to
flex that had previously been
quite atrophied, which is
not the muscle of fear,
which is very strong, but the
muscle of-- there are many
words--
desire, love, bliss, vision.
And you realize, it's not
that you have no motivation
to do anything.
It's just that all the usual
menu options in society
are all driven by fear.
And you're like, yeah, but I
don't have any fear, so I'm not
going to check that box.
I don't have any fear, I'm
fine with my body image.
I'm not going to check that box.
And you leave all
these boxes unchecked
and you're sitting at
home alone doing nothing,
and you have gobs of free time.
And your mind will
naturally work.
Other board members will be
like, hey, now can we paint?
The board is like,
sure, whatever.
Yeah.
Do we still have those paints
we bought like three years ago?
Yeah, let's pull them out.
And before you know
it, you're painting.
In other words, nature
abhors a vacuum.
So when fear is
taken off the table,
the vacuum doesn't
last very long.
You can hear the hissing.
And the thing that's coming
in, the only other thing aside
from fear is love slash desire.
And so your radar starts
to lock on things--
it sounds corny, but you do
out of love, not out of fear.
And when you do
something out of love,
you're doing it
for no good reason.
It doesn't make money.
It doesn't burnish my baseball
card or my reputation.
It doesn't look good or not
good on Instagram or whatever.
I'm just doing it because
I'm just this stupid nerd,
and I like collecting a
certain kind of stamp.
I don't know.
I don't know, so sue me.
I don't know why I like this.
I just like it.
And you start doing
things for that reason.
And then those things
then, when you take them
through the bliss
process of, so these
are all the things you like.
Which happen to create value?
And then of those people
it creates value to,
who are the ones who feel the
most intrinsic empathy toward?
Then, if you wish--
you don't have to.
There is no should.
There's no finger-wagging.
If you wish, you can
start to craft that
into actually your
livelihood from there
forward, if you want.
Some people, they've
lived in fear for so long,
they've got a huge bank
account from all the companies
they've started and
sold or whatever,
and it doesn't matter as much.
But you still do it not
because you need the money,
but because money is
also a board member.
It's a valid life force.
Everything around
us-- the microphone,
the camera, you
guys flying here,
me being here-- it's
all enabled by money.
And if you see it only
as a necessary evil,
you're exiling
that board member.
We're not saying go in
the other direction, where
it is the dictator
running the whole show.
That's out of fear too.
But there is a balanced, healthy
place for money on the board.
And so you'll often end
up doing your bliss,
and there will be money
involved, because it
does create value for people.
And that's OK.
So the move from
fear to love feels
like that, where
you do great things
and you don't get more love.
So you don't do anything out
of fear anymore, to get love,
or to avoid losing love.
The love is just
maxed all the time.
And then from that, the
love which is maxed--
which you're actually
acknowledging exists now--
it starts to have
its own opinion over,
like, well, let's go do that.
And it's like, well, that
won't make any money.
Yeah, but that's OK.
If we don't make money,
we won't lose love.
Oh yeah, never mind.
I'm going to go
back to my cupcake.
Oh yeah, so let's go paint.
Let's go paint.
And you paint, and you do
all the stuff mindlessly.
You don't think about it.
It just kind of happens.
You talk about flow.
Things just flow out of you.
It was like someone was
doing it through my hands.
That's love, surrender, and
all of those related things.
>> That's beautiful.
I love it.
>> Thank you.
>> I get it.
I totally get it.
Switch off the switch.
And meditation, can that help?
>> Meditation can help.
So what I do is, I'm a nerd
of trying to sort of figure
out, in this global chess
game, how to get in there
and switch off the switch.
That's why when I told you I
don't really do interviews--
I don't want to do an
interview where they're
going to use what I'm saying to
wag a finger at the audience,
saying now you need to do
this, because Artie said this.
I just can't be a part of
that, because my whole point is
to flip the switch, where
it's like basically--
I mean, it sounds
weird to say this.
My teaching philosophy is you
don't need to do anything.
You don't owe anybody
a goddamn thing.
And you're loved
without condition.
I mean, I tell my kids--
I hesitate saying this.
I'll soften it.
So what I'd tell my kids
when they were younger was,
you can go out and commit
crimes all day long--
horrendous, monstrous
crimes-- and you
will not lose one
iota of love from me.
Now, that having been
said, please don't do that.
Please don't do that.
But for all these other reasons,
you'll have a crappy life.
You'll go to jail.
You'll break my heart.
You'll be unhappy.
You'll hurt other people.
Why would you want to do that?
So there are a bazillion
reasons why you wouldn't
do those bad, harmful things.
But please don't let
one of those reasons
be that you fear
losing love for me,
because that's not on the table.
It's not.
That's why I like the
monstrous serial killer.
The mother is still like,
please, take me instead.
He's a good boy.
And it's like, well,
that's unconditional love.
You know?
And so my way of looking at it--
and this is
horrifying for people
who are all about law
and order, because it's
suppression and control.
And I get that.
I'm a fan of law and order.
But the thing is, if you
really flip that switch
and you know you're
loved without condition,
then everything else
flows from that.
If there is a young
man who feels,
no matter how weird he
is, no matter what kind
of weird comics he likes
to read or weird music he
likes to listen to, that he
is loved without condition--
without condition, nothing
he does makes him lose love--
that's a man, I would wager,
who would never pick up a gun,
unless perhaps it is
to defend the homeland.
So guns are not
intrinsically bad.
The military is a sacred
function of society.
But when you pick up a gun in
defense of the people you love,
you're picking up a gun out
of love, not out of fear.
And so for me, I'm just
like, if I can just
get in and flip that switch
for as many people as possible,
then--
first of all, I don't
think I'm doing any harm.
And I'm just this
nerdy, like, let's
just flip as many switches as
we can and see what happens.
That's my excitement.
And so for me, what
I teach is the lore
to get you to start to
think about flipping
that switch is your meaning
and purpose in life.
You can't fulfill your
meaning and purpose
in life out of abject fear.
You're just too small.
You're constricted.
You never opened your
clenched fist of fear,
so you can never play the piano.
With bliss, I get pulled
backwards kicking and screaming
into healing-related stuff.
So at an advisory
level, I'm happy to talk
with people about healing
and help them through that.
But the minute they're
like, actually,
I think I'm ready for
therapy, I'm like, right on.
Do it.
I'm the air traffic controller.
Come back whenever you're ready.
We're not going anywhere.
For me, I'm working on
getting all my stuff recorded
so that like the virtual
AR already will still
be here when I'm dead.
So if I get hit by a
bus, it's still here.
Take your time.
There's no pressure.
I'm not going anywhere.
And then, so all the related
healing stuff, and then
things like meditation, and
then even helping people
do things like read their dreams
or recover their lost board
numbers.
The key to this healing, for
me, is finding your lost board
member and recovering it.
Because the
quintessence within you
of feeling like a part
of you is not worthy--
I mean, it's probably
deeper, but let's just
say the musician in you
who was stuffed down.
When you finally recover him--
look, we're not going
to quit our lives
and go join the circus,
because we're not
going 100% in your direction.
But also, we're not going
to go in 100% of the bully's
direction and just
be an accountant
for the rest of our lives.
We're going to have to come up
with some kind of compromise
plan.
That is stepping away from fear.
Because if I add a little mix,
maybe increasing over time,
of musician, I
will not lose love.
And I slowly get
acclimated to that.
For most people,
that board member
is stuffed down
very, very deeply.
And it will come up
with all kinds of ways
to get its message to you--
pulling the emergency
brake, having
a big crisis in your
life, getting laid off,
throwing out your back.
All these things are
ways of doing it.
And what I specialize
in as a part
of helping to flip
the switch is to try
to give that board member ways
of reaching you without having
to go to that extreme.
Because I'm like,
oh, if you just
wanted me to read the email
that I had marked as spam
and blocked you and
unfriended you on Facebook,
and now you're like, I'm lying
in a hospital bed stressing
about something scary
they saw on an MRI,
because you're rattling my
cage to get my attention--
OK, OK.
So now I acknowledge
you're powerful.
Can we just take a
moment, and can you just--
I'm here now.
Can you just tell me
what you want to tell me?
And I will sit.
I will tie myself to
the chair and listen,
because now I realize,
just hearing it from you
directly is better than
what happened last month.
And I get it now.
I'm here.
You have my attention.
What would you like me to say?
And there are two
very powerful ways
that lost board number will come
to you when your guard is down
and you're more
accidentally receptive.
And the two are when
you're meditating
and when you're asleep.
So meditation,
you'll get visions.
That lost board member
will come up and start
talking at you, a
voice that you usually
don't allow to yourself.
When you're in full meditation
and those things within you
are open, that will be the
moment where the guerrilla
forces are like, OK, now.
Go, go, go.
They run up to you.
And you're like, you're
going to stab me.
No, they're handing
you an envelope.
Please don't burn this one
like you did the last 3,000
we've been trying to send you.
And then dreams
are the other one.
Dreams is a whole other
subset we won't get into.
But I've found that I've
gotten into helping people
with dreams--
again, very haltingly,
very begrudgingly.
But what I've found is that when
people start a healing cycle,
their dreams will
invariably fire up.
And even dreams that have
been recurring for 30 years,
when you start to
remember, oh yeah,
there's this dream I've had
for 30 years that's recurring.
And I'm like, OK, you just
spent an hour telling me
you don't dream.
Which is fine.
That happens.
The most common dream pattern
is someone chasing you,
a boogie man chasing
you, invading your home,
breaking into your home.
And typically, the
way I read that is
that that is some form of lost
board member running after you,
trying to get your message.
And it's so at the
end of its rope,
because it's tried
everything else--
it's tried your girlfriend
breaking up with you.
It's tried your son
telling you you're a jerk
and not talking to you.
Nothing's getting
through, because you're
like, I have to continue
soothing and shielding.
Finally, it'll come to you
in this dream where you're
being chased, because
it has resorted
to pulling the lever of fear,
because unless you wake up
at 3:00 in the morning
in a cold sweat,
you won't remember anything.
And so I'm going
to do that to you.
Sorry, but I'm going
to hit the button,
wake you up at 3:00 in the
morning in the cold sweat.
You'll have this dream.
And the problem is, it doesn't
know that we're in 2019
and Western civiliz-- it doesn't
know you can't go anywhere
to get the dream read.
You go on the internet
for dream directory
and it says, oh, boogeyman
is some lost fear of yours.
And it's like, what
does even that mean?
But it's a very ancient
part of ourselves.
So when people come to
me, I say, OK, OK, fine.
Have your dreams been firing up?
And I know the answer.
Just give me a few, and I'll
just give you the thumbnail,
but just enough so that you're
like, OK, this is a real thing.
I get it, and I'm willing to
go find my lost board member.
And that typically is enough.
So it's basically, I'm all
about flipping the switch.
The byproduct for
everyone else's benefit
too is that they end up
on track to their bliss.
But the whole craft of
getting that switch flipped is
something that just organically,
these other things have come up
as the need has arisen.
So I'm having fun all day long.
I'm like the guy in
his workshop just
fussing with all these
different things.
Thankfully, I have
a lot of people
who come to me for
this kind of thing,
so I get to ask them
about their experiences.
I'm in the kitchen and
I'm like, here, try this.
Is it too spicy?
What do you think of it?
So I'm very much in my bliss.
I'm just a pig in a cool
pond of mud all day long.
And I get to have
interviews like this.
>> So great.
Appreciative of your time.
It has me thinking of this
term, amor vincit omnia, which
Laurentine's
grandmother had engraved
on the inside of
our wedding rings,
which is like love conquers all.
So beautiful.
So yeah, thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]